Now that you are familiar with calculating mutual information and how it relates to covariance, I'm
going to have two code challenges to help you learn more about these methods and how to use them in
practice.
This code challenge here is an action packed, coffee fueled adventure where you're going to learn about
the impact of extreme values on mutual information.
A different way to organize the mutual information calculation that better equalizes issues around sample
size and computation time.
You will learn how to statistically compare two different correlation coefficients and lots of other
things.
And you're also going to learn more about the differences between the attention and MLP subblocks of
the transformer.
It's a big code challenge.
So let's begin.
The goal of exercise one is to import a model and get the activations from within the transformer blocks.
We're going to use GPT two x.
And here's a reminder of what it looks like.
It has 48 transformer blocks, which is great because that will really allow us to track how the mutual
information and its relation to token position changes as the embeddings vectors traverse deeper into
the model.
Next, you want to hook the outputs of the attention and MLP subblocks.
Now this is not the query keys and values vectors that we've used previously several times, but instead
what you want here in this video is the final output of the attention calculation.
And in the OpenAI GPT two models that is referred to as the projection or C proj.
So write functions and implant hooks into these two projections.
So attention and MLP for all 48 of the transformer blocks.
Now if you look in the helper file or the solutions code file, you will see some text about Turkish
coffee.
It's just a paragraph about Turkish coffee.
This is exactly the same text that we used in the previous video.
And yeah, so there's 94 tokens in total, 67 of which are unique.
And in particular, what you want to do is identify all of the indices where the word coffee appears
in this text.
So it appears seven times in total in this paragraph.
So here is the first appearance of the word coffee.
That is index one.
So that we see here.
And these are the indexes corresponding to the other presentations of the word coffee.
Now this is a really interesting approach for examining internal model calculations.
Because each of these seven appearances is literally exactly identical in terms of the token itself.
Furthermore, the macro context is the same for all seven of these words, in the sense that it's just
one short paragraph and it's all on one particular topic.
But the local context is different for each of these words, because each of the words surrounding each
appearance of the word coffee is slightly different, and that will be the main focus of the rest of
this code challenge you are going to evaluate the mutual information across all of the output dimensions
for attention and MLP for the different appearances of the word coffee.
And then you will see how mutual information relates to the distances between the different appearances
of the word coffee.
Anyway, I will get back to the analyses later.
That's for later exercises.
The final part of this exercise, uh, is to push the tokens through the model to get the activations.
So this screenshot here just shows a confirmation of the expected activation matrix size.
There's just one sequence of text 94 tokens.
And the embeddings dimensionality of GPT two XL is 1600.
So now you can pause the video, switch to code, and begin the adventure that is this code challenge.
And now I will switch to code and discuss my solution.
Most of these libraries you have seen before.
Here I'm importing the Scipy.stats library because in a later exercise in this code challenge, we are
going to use the Kendall correlation.
I'll talk about that more later.
It's a different type of correlation compared to the Pearson correlation.
And then I'm also using this function here called FDR correction.
This is a method that I will use here for correcting for multiple comparisons.
Again I'll talk about that more later in the code challenge when it becomes important.
But basically you know, we often correct for multiple comparisons using the Bonferroni method where
you divide the statistical threshold of p less than 0.05 by the number of comparisons that you're making.
And in this video I'm going to use for corrections.
Just a slightly different approach to multiple comparisons corrections.
Anyway, here is the code for exercise one.
So here I'm importing the model I'm getting switching it to eval mode.
You can see that even though it is the big version of this model, I'm still just running it on the
CPU and not on the GPU.
If you would like to run this on the GPU, totally fine.
That's great, but we're only actually running pushing data through this model exactly once, so we
don't really need to use the GPU.
Okay.
Yeah.
And then I have this variable for n layers.
That's just the number of transformer blocks.
And that's just for convenience for later on.
Okay.
Here's where I define the functions for the hooks.
So all of this code you have seen before, there are two functions that I have created Did just to have
different naming conventions in here.
It actually would be possible to set this up just using one function.
And for example, you could add something like this, a name, and then you would call this name and
so on.
So it actually is possible to do this in one function.
But I just use two functions okay.
Here I'm looping through all of the hidden layers you can see for attention C proj and then mlp c proj.
And then I'm implanting the hook into each of those two transformer subblocks so I can run this cell.
It's actually not going to run just yet because we are still loading in all of the tensors.
You can see it's 6.4GB.
So it does take, you know, a couple of good couple of seconds for this to load in.
Actually it's several minutes but that's okay.
All right.
So that code is in the queue.
It will run.
Here is the paragraph on Turkish coffee.
This code you've seen before.
This you have not seen before.
I'm looking for the token coffee.
And just make sure that when you are searching through a text, if you're looking for a particular word,
then you're going to get a different result.
If you have a space in there versus do not have a space.
Now, if you're just processing individual words that are isolated, they're not in a in any text or
a context, then you can use this.
That's fine.
But in this case, the tokenizer is actually not going to recognize coffee as its own token.
Instead, it's going to prioritize space coffee because that just appears more often in text.
So just a little reminder that we discussed that plenty earlier in the course.
Okay.
And then here I'm just looking for where the tokens are equal to the target token.
So that's going to give me the seven indices where the word coffee appears, and then here I push all
the models through and actually not analyzing the hidden states here in this code challenge.
But I set this variable to be true.
And I included this here because I want to encourage you to use the code that you are seeing here that
I've written for you, uh, as a way to continue exploring and running analyses about llms.
So, for example, you could see what is the relationship between mutual activation after the attention
versus after the MLP versus after the entire transformer block, which is what you'd get from these
hidden states anyway.
So that's just, uh, inspiration for you.
It's not actually what I'm doing here.
Okay, so I'll run this and it's not actually going to run yet because we're still importing these,
uh, these tensors here.
Actually, it's not even a third of the way through yet, but you will see that this piece of code here
takes maybe a minute or so if you run this on the GPU.
It only takes like two seconds.
But you know, this is the only time that we actually need to push any data through the model.
So I think it's not really necessary to use the GPU here.
Okay.
And then the final thing I will do is check the shape of just any random pick of one of these matrices.
Again, that's just to confirm that we get an expected result before we get to the main analyses of
this code challenge.
We need to have a look and a critical think about the data as you start to work with model activations.
You will often find that there are extreme values.
That is, there will be a small number of activation magnitudes that are really far away from the rest
of the distribution of activation values.
And actually, I've shown you several examples of this before, in particular with activations to the
very first token in the sequence.
And at that time I said that the first token is often ignored in analyses because the model has no context
to process that first token.
But you will also find that lots of other tokens have one or a small number of dimensions, or neurons
that have really high activations.
Now, on the one hand, that is itself pretty interesting because it means that there is a small number
of dimensions that are really important for processing a given token.
But on the other hand, from the perspective of statistical analyses, a very small number of A very
extreme values can cause estimation errors and can give biased or misleading statistical results.
So from an analysis perspective, we often need to remove extreme values before calculating statistical
characteristics.
Anyway, exploring this phenomenon is the main goal of this exercise.
So to start with, make a scatter plot that looks something like this.
So each of these little green circles corresponds to the activation of the attention output from a transformer.
Block three for the first target word on the x axis and the second target word.
So appearance of the word coffee on the y axis.
And you can see that there are a couple of really extreme data values in here.
Now I have identified these extreme values by calculating the z score of each data point for each target
word, and plotting in red any activation values that are more than four standard deviations away from
the mean in either one of the dimensions.
So here, as a reminder, is the formula for the z score transformation.
Z is each individual data point, which in this case is each activation.
For a given dimension, the x bar is the average of the activations, and the sigma here refers to the
standard deviation.
Now, when you transform the data to a z score, you can label any activation that's more than four.
As an outlier.
You can do that separately for each of the target words, and any activation that is an outlier.
In at least one of the target words, you can consider an outlier.
Next, you can calculate the mutual information for this example on the full data.
So including the outliers and also on the trimmed data which means just the green circles excluding
these red squares these extreme values.
And then you will notice that the results differ quite a bit.
That's what you see in the title here.
And now what I'd like you to do is modify the code for the function that implements the direct translation
of the mutual information formulas, the equations into code, and in particular, what I want you to
do is incorporate code to remove outliers in the mutual information calculation.
So this function here is almost the same that you've seen in previous videos, except that I included
an additional output here for outlier thresh and the default value is zero.
And then the idea is if this value is greater, this input value, if it's greater than zero, then
you can z score the variables, identify outliers based on extreme values that you see with this line
of code here, and then calculate the entropy and mutual information with uh excluding these outlier
values.
And finally, you want to repeat this calculation using mutual information from the scikit learn library.
And when you do that you can print out all of the results in a list that looks like this.
Now, this is a really nuanced and difficult issue in applied statistics because although these data
points are extreme, they're not mistakes, they're not errors, they're real data values.
But they can really screw up the analyses and lead to incorrect and misleading interpretations.
So I'll have a few more things to say about comparing the trimmed versus full analyses when I switch
to code.
But first, you should pause the video and work through this exercise.
And now I will switch to code, show my solution, and have a bit more of a discussion about practical
statistics.
So here is the function to calculate mutual information.
Now if you ignore this for the moment and you just look at this.
This is identical to code you have seen in the past several videos.
The only thing that's new here in this video in this exercise is this bit of code here.
So if this optional input outlier thresh is greater than zero then I z score the data.
I find all of the outliers and then I remove those outliers.
So here what I'm doing is redefining X to be itself and the indices of anything that is not considered
an outlier.
So that's the way I chose to do it.
There's multiple other ways to implement this.
But the main point is that now we will continue with the analyses but using data that have outliers
removed.
Now the important thing about implementing this bit of code here is that the same values are removed
from both variables.
And that's because for mutual information, you know, the analysis is based on statistical dependencies.
So obviously the two vectors need to be perfectly aligned.
So if you remove data from one variable, you need to remove the same indices from the other variable,
even if the data are not necessarily an extreme outlier value in the other variable.
Okay.
So run that code.
And yeah, here I'm just extracting a little bit of data.
Identifying outliers.
This is code here to generate the plot.
So I'm not actually calling this function just yet.
So uh z transform identify outliers based on a threshold of four.
And then uh, here I'm calculating mutual information.
And actually this is a little bit redundant here.
What I could do is remove these and say, uh, what did I call that variable?
I called this variable outlier thresh.
So I could also do it this way.
Outlier thresh equals threshold.
That's fine.
Although it was also fine.
Uh, the previous way I had it.
Okay.
And then here I'm calculating mutual information using the scikit learn method.
Mutual information regression.
This reshaping business you've seen before.
And then here I'm calculating it twice.
Once using the full versions of X and once without the outliers.
Okay.
And then here is the visualization.
So reproduces exactly what I showed in the slides.
This is an interesting data point here because it's not nearly as extreme as like either one of these
two values.
And it's also not that extreme for target word two.
But it is extreme.
It is technically suprathreshold on target word one because it's a bit outside the distribution.
Now, whether you really want to consider this to be an outlier and not, for example, this data point
or this data point, this is where statistics starts getting tricky because we have to define thresholds.
And thresholds are always going to work sometimes, and they're not going to work other times.
So you could keep tweaking this around.
And maybe you want to use a threshold of five standard deviations that will preserve this data point
while eliminating these two data points.
But on the other hand, maybe you will see other situations where a threshold of five is inappropriate
and you would actually want to reduce the threshold back down to four.
So at the end of the day, it's best to pick one threshold and use it consistently throughout all the
analyses within one study, so that if there are these kind of weird things that are being introduced,
at least it's not systematic and it's not being driven by your visual expectation of what you think
the results should look like.
So but yeah, this this sort of weird thing always happens.
It's just the nature of doing statistics.
And it's a good motivation to have a lot of data to work with, because the more data you have, the
smaller the impact of removing one or a small number of data points.
Okay, so just as a reminder here in this scatter plot, there are 1600 data points.
Almost all of them are in this little cloud here.
And then we have a couple of extreme values here.
And where do those 1600 points come from?
Those come from the activations of all of the attention.
I think this was attention.
Yeah.
All of the, uh, the output of the attention mechanism from block three.
Transformer, block three, uh, for target word one.
So the first appearance of coffee and the second appearance of the word coffee.
So they're strongly correlated with each other.
No surprise.
They come from exactly the same text.
Let's go back and look at that text.
So we have the activation to this word and the activation to this word.
And that is what you see uh, here in this plot.
Okay.
Very nice.
So now we already see that, uh, the, uh, that trimming the data actually increases the mutual information.
Almost double.
Slightly less than double.
So that tells us that these three data points in particular, these two really had a really large impact
on the mutual information value.
That is, with the manual calculation or the direct implementation of the formula for mutual information
in the code.
And basically what's happening here, the reason why these two values are so different from each other
is that, uh, when we discretize this to create histograms, to estimate the probability distribution,
we get, you know, these little islands out here and all zeros out here.
So when we empirically try to estimate the probability distribution, we get all zeros around here.
So many zeros that the model is just having a hard time really accurately Assessing the full probability
distribution.
And now let's see what happens when we use the kernel density estimator of the probability distributions
that are packaged into the scikit learn function.
Okay.
So here we see there was a big difference with the manual implementation.
And here with the scikit learn implementation we get values that are much closer to each other.
And so that indicates that the scikit learn implementation is actually much more robust to outliers
or extreme values, because it's doing a better job at estimating the probability distribution given
sparse and limited data.
Now we're going to start getting into some analyses here in exercise three you will calculate mutual
information and see how it relates to inter token distances.
Here.
We'll do it in just one transformer block.
And then in the next exercise, we will examine the laminar profile of the characteristics that we discover
here.
So there are seven appearances of the word coffee.
And you want to calculate the mutual information of all the embeddings dimensions from the output of
the attention from block three for all pairs of targets.
In other words, in this matrix here the value of each block.
For example, this block here is the mutual information over all 1600 dimensions between the the third
and the second appearance of the word coffee.
So that is for this matrix here.
This is mutual information.
The next thing you want to calculate is the inter token distances.
Now this is not the embeddings, vectors, or Euclidean distances.
It's literally just the number of tokens separating each pair of tokens.
So the result of this matrix is literally just a bunch of integers, and they increase the further away
the two tokens are from each other.
So the idea of this quantification is that the closer to target two tokens are to each other in the
text, the more shared context they have.
And when tokens are farther apart from each other, then they have less locally shared context.
So now we have mutual information between all the pairs, and we have the information of how far apart
each pair of tokens is from each other in the text.
And the third panel over here shows a scatterplot of these two sets of results.
And of course you only want to show the non-zero values here, because anything above the diagonal would
be perfectly redundant.
Okay.
So then the last step is to quantify any relationship you see between mutual information and inter token
distance using a correlation.
Now so far in this course we've only been using Pearson correlation coefficients.
And as you know that is almost exactly the same as cosine similarity.
However, the Pearson correlation is only used for two continuous variables.
Mutual information is a continuous variable.
So that's appropriate for Pearson correlation.
But inter token distances is not.
These are just integers.
And so therefore you should really not use the Pearson correlation for this analysis, there is another
type of correlation called a Kendall's tau correlation.
And this correlation is specifically designed for one variable, one variable being ordinal.
And that is exactly the data type that we have here.
So if you've taken my course on statistics and machine learning then you are familiar with this correlation
method.
If you have not come across the Kendall's tau correlation, don't worry about the formula or the implementational
details.
The important point for here is that you interpret the correlation coefficient in exactly the same way
as you interpret a Pearson correlation.
So in particular, the correlation for Kendall's tau can range from minus one to plus one with negative
correlations indicating reciprocal or opposite relationships.
By the way, I forgot to mention that in this exercise you want to use the manual implementation of
mutual information.
So the function that you wrote for exercise one do not use the mutual information function that comes
with scikit learn.
We're actually going to use that in exercise five to compare qualitatively the two approaches for mutual
information okay.
So that's it for exercise three.
Now you should pause the video and start coding and start visualizing.
And now I will switch to code and discuss my results.
Once we have this mutual information function written then it's actually pretty straightforward to implement
the rest of this analysis.
So here I have a double for loop over all of the tokens.
So we're looping over the token or sorry not all the tokens but the target tokens.
So we loop over all the appearances of the target tokens twice, because we want to calculate mutual
information between each pair of tokens.
And again, over here I'm starting the second for loop, after the first for loop.
So I'm not starting it at zero like this.
Because if you did this that would be fine.
You'd get a full matrix, but it's twice as many calculations for nothing.
There's no unique information that you get from calculating the full matrix that you don't have from
just half of the matrix.
Okay, anyway, here I extract the activations.
Now this is different from what we did in the previous video.
Remember in the previous video it was like dim I and then we were getting all of the tokens like this.
So activations for all the tokens.
And so yeah, this is a different approach that we're doing here.
Here it is one token in particular.
And then all of the activations from this particular subblock from this particular layer.
Okay.
So token position I token position J.
These are two different appearances of the word coffee.
And then I put that into the mutual information function with the number four corresponding to the outlier
threshold for excluding or trimming data values.
Extreme values.
Okay.
And then this is just the token distance.
Literally just the number of tokens in between each target.
Okay.
So now I can run all of this.
That goes very fast.
Don't worry about this line here that we will get back to for exercise five.
But you can already see that it's the same exact overall analyses.
We're just calculating mutual information differently.
And now we are ready for the visualization.
So here in the first axis I'm showing mutual information.
In the second axis I'm showing the token distances.
Here is where I calculate the Kendall tau.
So the correlations between the token distances and the mutual information.
And you want to make sure to extract just the non-zero elements of these two matrices.
And then here I'm making the scatter plot of them.
So here we see mutual information inter token distances again just like what you saw in the slides.
And this was covered up in the slides.
But now you see this beautiful negative correlation.
Highly statistically significant.
The correlation coefficient is -0.5.
And what does this mean.
What does this tell us.
This tells us that in general, as the two tokens get further apart from each other, The mutual information
between them decreases.
It's not a perfect relationship because, yeah, language is complicated.
There's a lot of context happening in here.
But in general, we see that the closer the two tokens are to each other, the stronger the mutual information.
And that should make sense intuitively when you use the word coffee repeatedly in, you know, just
a few words apart, then the local context is the same.
And when you use the word coffee twice like three days apart, the chance of the context being exactly
the same is much lower.
I hope you're enjoying this code challenge so far.
I'm going to break the video here as a way to encourage you to stand up, stretch your legs, splash
some water on your face when you feel refreshed and ready, then come back and continue to the end of
this code challenge.